The satellite galaxies of the Milky Way (MW), with the exception of the Magellanic clouds, are all dwarf spheroidals (dSphs)—gas-free, non-rotating stellar systems whos gravity is dominated by dark matter. The light profiles of dSphs are usually well-approximated by an exponential law, with a sharp outer cutoff. Yet systems like the Sculptor (Scl) and Ursa Minor (UMi) dSphs have been found to host member stars far from the main body, out to $\sim10$ effective radii.  The origin of these extended profiles is not clear, and may reflect either the influence of Galactic tides or instead an innate feature. In this thesis, I review the excestence of an extended light profiles in Scl and UMi, validating the Bayesian membership catalogue of @jensen+2024. To evaluate if tides indeed can explain these density features, I conduct idealized N-body simulation of both galaxies in the tidal field of the Milky Way. I find that neigher dwarf has been subjected to tidal forces strong enough to create the observed extended light profiles from initially exponential profiles. One complication is that Sculptor's orbit is strongly influenced by the presence of the Large Magellanic Cloud (LMC). Because the LMC's mass is poorly constrained, Sculptor's long term orbital history is highly uncertain. Despite this uncertainty, our models still suggest that the combined tides of the LMC and MW are still unable to explain Scl's outer profile over the past 5 Gyr.  I conclude that the extended light profiles of Scl and UMi are innate, likely reflecting their formation histories. Mergers, accretion events, or complex, multi-component star formation episodes are possible explanations for such an extended outer profile.