In the previous chapters, we have shown that (1) Sculptor and Ursa Minor have unusually extended density profiles for MW classical satellites and (2) recent tides are an unlikely explanation. Here, we first consider the reliability and assumptions supporting our conclusions. We then consider possible formation scenarios of extended density profiles, including multi-epoch star formation, dwarf mergers and subhalo encounters, and alternative theories of dwarf galaxy structure. We finish with an outlook on prospects for disentangling various stellar halo formation scenarios. 

While tides have been a popular explanation for some features of dwarf galaxies [discussion above, and e.g., @tsujimoto+shigeyama2002; @mayer+2001a ], our work, and many others, have disfavoured this for Scl, UMi, and many other MW dwarfs. For example, @read+2006 suggest that the lack of observational evidence for a rising velocity dispersion profile with radii indicates most dwarfs are not tidally affected. Later, @penarrubia+2009 define and use the break radius, @eq:r_break, to show that the (then understood) orbits of most satellites are inconsistent with a tidal feature. In addition, @pace+erkal+li2022 use a criterion based on the observed mean density and orbital pericentre (like the Jacobi radius) to show most dwarfs are unlikely to be undergoing significant tidal disruption. Most recently, @tchiorniy+genina2025 use a similar idealized framework to ours, with a focus on the inner density, showing tides do not strongly affect equilibrium assumptions for several classical dwarfs. The general tidal evolution of our simulations is furthermore consistent with much of the literature [e.g., @robles+bullock2021; @EN2021]. Tides seem to now play a subdominant role in the evolution of most Milky Way satellites.

# Comparison with prior work

For both Scl and UMi, these galaxies have been studied extensively in both a theoretical and observational context. While many works considered mass modelling, star formation histories, chemistry, and other observational properties, we focus on the observations and models concerning tides and dynamical evolution here. 

However, some cosmological simulations have suggested that tidal effects may be ubiquitous. [@riley+2024; @shipp+2023] find that a majority of satellites form substantial streams, and not due to resolution effects [see also @panithanpaisal+2021]. This result appears to be in tension with ours and many previous works. Some reasons cosmological and idealized simulations may give opposite results could include resolution effects [e.g., @santos-santos+2025], additional perturbations from dark matter substructure, tidal "pre-processing" by other infalling satellites, or the streams may be below detection limits [e.g., @shipp+2023]. More work is needed to understand why streams appear to form more readily in cosmological simulations than is observed in the Milky Way or through idealized simulations.

Closely related to our work,  @iorio+2019 applied idealized N-body simulations to study tidal effects on Scl. They similarly found weak tidal effects, even for a dark-matter-free model. However, their orbits are less well-constrained and they did not consider the LMC. 

## Sculptor

Scl has long been speculated to be disturbed. @innanen+papp1979 found RR Lyrae candidate Scl members [from @vanagt1978] out to 180' in an elongated distribution, speculating this to be tidal disruption. Many later density profile determinations noted Scl's elongation and apparent outer density excess similar to J+24's detection [@eskridge1988; @IH1995; @walcher+2003;  @westfall+2006, but see also @coleman+dacosta+bland-hawthorn2005]. Scl's ellipticity and extended density profile were often interpreted as evidence of  tidal debris or sometimes a dwarf galaxy halo. 

In addition, Scl hosts at least two populations, as revealed through photometry [@tolstoy+2004], kinematics [@battaglia+2008; @tolstoy+2023; @arroyo-polonio+2024], dynamical structure [@breddels+helmi2014], age gradients [@deboer+2011], and chemistry [@kirby+2009 ]. These two populations both have radii smaller than the outer density excess. Scl challenges the idea of a simple, single-component dwarf spheroidal population and hints at episodic star formation or hierarchical assembly. 

## Ursa Minor

UMi has garnered claims of inner substructure such as stellar or kinematic "clumps". Studies by @olszewski+aaronson1985, @demers+1995, @IH1995, @kleyna+1998, @battinelli+demers1999, and @bellazzini+2002  note that Ursa Minor appears to contain "clumps" along its major axis. One clump has furthermore been shown to be kinematically distinct and colder  [e.g., @pace+2014]. If a star cluster, than the cluster should disolve in $\sim 3$ Gyrs provided the UMi's halo is not cored and did not interact with dark (sub)subhalos---the survival of such substructure depends on the nature of dark matter [@kleyna+2003; @lora+2012]. @wilkinson+2004 additionally find a puzzling drop in the velocity dispersion in the outskirts. The nature of any clumps or substructure remains unclear, but @munoz+2018's are unable to find signs of any substructure with modern, deeper photometry. 

In addition, several works have found supposed tidal features in UMi. @hargreaves+1994 first detected a velocity gradient in UMi, suggestive of tidal disruption. Later, @martinez-delgado+2001 find that stars extend far beyond the 
"tidal radius" (from a King profile fit) for Ursa Minor, in the direction of the galaxy's elongation [see corresponding simulations by @gomez-flechoso+martinez-delgado2003]. @palma+2003 further showed evidence for S-shaped contours, and an extended population of "extratidal" stars. Our density profiles are consistent with these works. However, strong evidence of tidal disruption has not yet been found.

# Forming a stellar halo {#sec:stellar_halos}

As a tidal origin of Scl and UMi's extended density profiles is disfavoured,  we consider alternative processes which may form a dwarf galaxy "stellar halo". Some recent works have also confirmed the presence of extended, likely non-tidal, density profiles. For example, @chiti+2021; @chiti+2023 spectroscopically confirm members out to $~9 R_h$ in Tucana II. Given these stars are misaligned with the orbit and the lack of a velocity gradient, tides seem to be an unlikely explanation for Tucana II as well. The prevalence of stellar halos around dwarf galaxies remains an active research topic.

Many dwarf galaxies also host multiple chemodynamical stellar populations. Typically, older populations are extended, kinematically hotter, and metal-poo , whereas the younger populations are more compact, colder, and metal-rich. Examples include Carina [@battaglia+2012, @fabrizio+2016, @kordopatis+2016], Fornax [@battaglia+2006, @amorisco+evans2012, @delpino+aparicio+hidalgo2015], Sextans [@battaglia+2011; @cicuendez+battaglia2018; @roederer+2023 ], and Andromeda II [@mcconnachie+arimoto+irwin2007; @ho+2012; @delpino+2017]. Evidence of multiple-populations in dwarf galaxies suggests that effects like galaxy mergers or episodic star formation shape the stellar structure of dwarf galaxies.

We now explore possible origins of a "stellar halo" which may resemble the extended density profiles in Scl and UMi.

## Internal processess

**Dynamical heating of old stars**. In a galaxy, older stars generally have higher random velocities (i.e., kinematically "hotter") than younger stars. In dwarf galaxies, several mechanism may heat stellar components, including supernovae kicks in forming stars,  feedback-driven potential fluctuations [@stinson+2009; @maxwell+2012; @el-badry+2016; @mercado+2021], or heating by dark sub-subhalos [@penarrubia+2025]. Over time, these processes naturally produce a more extended, older stellar population.

**Episodic star formation and feedback.** Dwarf galaxies are thought to experience bursty star formation--i.e., consisting of several episodes of intense star formation separated by periods of quiescence [e.g., @salvadori+ferrara+schneider2008; @valcke+derijcke+dejonghe2008;  @wheeler+2019; @azartash-namin+2024]. Stellar feedback in a dwarf galaxy's shallow potential well drives oscillations in the star formation rate. Alternatively, re-ionization may temporarily suspending star formation [@benitez-llambay+2015]. In many simulations, shrinking gas reservoirs form centrally-concentrated later generations of stars, naturally spawning multiple populations  [@kawata+2006; @revaz+jablonka2018]. However, star formation is also sensitive to a dwarf's environment.

## External processes

**Induced star formation.** Star formation may quench and reignite due to an external perturbation. Examples include tidal compression [@mayer+2001a; @dong+lin+murray2003], gaseous filaments [@genina+2019], dark halos [@starkenburg+helmi+sales2016], or shocks with the MW corona [@wright+2019]. Induced burst would be more stochastic than internal bursts, possibly explaining diversity in dwarf galaxy structure.

**Major mergers.** When galaxies merge, they may leave signatures such as population gradients and stellar halos. Classical dwarfs have a $\sim 10\%$ chance of undergoing a major merger since redshift $z=1$ [@deason+wetzel+garrison-kimmel2014]. Mergers may preferentially disperse the lower-mass galaxy’s stars, forming a halo and a metallicity gradient [@benitez-llambay+2016]. Intermediate-mass mergers (with mass-ratios of $\sim$ 1:5) most effectively populate halos, balancing stellar mass from larger galaxies with better dispersion of lower-mass galaxies [@deason+2022]. Tuc II's properties are suggested to originate from a similar merger [@tarumi+yoshida+frebel2021; @querci+2025]. 

**Gas-rich mergers.** If a merger occurs between gas-rich galaxies, triggered star formation may occur in the aftermath [e.g., @genina+2019]. And II and Phoenix have steep metallicity gradients and unusual prolate rotation, theorized to result from mergers of disky dwarfs [@lokas+2014; @fouquet+2017; @cardona-barrero+2021].

**Minor mergers / accretion**. Like how the Milky Way's halo is believed to be built from many minor mergers, dwarf galaxies may form halos through accretion of yet fainter dwarfs. @ricotti+polisensky+cleland2022 demonstrated that accretion of ultra-faint dwarfs may create dwarf stellar halos. A stream detected around And II further supports the occurrence of mergers among dwarfs [@amorisco+evans+vandeven2014; @roederer+2023]. In this scenario, the halo chemistry would resemble a population of ultra-faint dwarfs. The occurance of dwarf mergers would further constrain small-scale galaxy formation. 

**Tidal preprocessing**. Dwarf galaxies may have been "preprocessed" by a larger satellite like the LMC [e.g., @santistevan+2023; @riley+2024]. From the orbit integrations above, it is possible that UMi was once an LMC satellite. However, the prevalence of preprocessing remains uncertain. Like stellar heating, preprocessing redistributes already-present stellar populations.

**Tidal dwarf galaxies** are cluster-like objects which form in gas-rich tidal streams created during the merger of two galaxies [e.g., @mirabel+dottori+lutz1992; @bournaud+duc2006]. Tidal dwarfs may be more susceptible to tides, forming extended density profiles and appearing to have dark matter [@casas+2012; @yang+2014; @wang+2024a]. If Scl and UMi are tidal dwarfs, a stronger velocity (dispersion) gradient and tidal tails should be detectible.

## Beyond \LCDM{}

**Modified Newtonian Dynamics (MOND)**. MOND modifies gravity instead of using dark matter to explain the rotation curves of galaxies. In MOND, tides may more strongly affect dwarf galaxies owing to the lack of dark matter mass and the stronger MW tidal field [@mcgaugh+wolf2010; @brada+milgrom2000]. A tidal origin of the density excess is more likely in this case. If MOND is to recover the observed velocity dispersions of satellites, then many more dwarfs may be actively tidally disrupting as well [@casas+2012; @yang+2014; @wang+2024a]. 

**Self-interacting dark matter (SIDM).** SIDM significantly complicates tidal evolution. SIDM halos in isolation are not static---by transferring heat through collisions, these halos first undergo core formation and then core collapse. Besides structural changes, SIDM adds that pressure from the host DM halo can change the structure (e.g. aiding core collapse) or remove material from the inner galaxy (analogous to ram pressure stripping) [e.g., @cartonzeng+2024]. An SIDM halo may be more strongly affected by tides, but the velocity dispersion makes a tidal disruption in SIDM still unlikely. 

**Fuzzy dark matter** can also heat up stars owing to density perturbations in the form of interference fringes [e.g., @el-zant+2020; @duttachowdhury+2023]. Similar to other intrinsic heating methods, this model would likely affect all dwarfs similarly, so we should detect similar halos around similar dwarfs. 

## Disentangling the origin of a stellar halo.

We just reviewed a number of different, possibly-concurrent explanations for the formation of a stellar halo. While we leave the nature of Scl and UMi's extended stellar densities an open question, we can discuss possible clues to different formation scenarios. 

**Chemistry**. Large samples of detailed chemical abundances have been invaluable for understanding MW substructure (e.g. for *Gaia*-Sausage Enceladus). Chemistry, particularly comparing the inner and outer regions could test if the halo appears to originate from a distinct system than the dwarf, differentiating many *internal* versus *external* scenarios.  

**Star formation histories**. Evidence of significant star formation episodes or lack thereof may differentiate scenarios which rely on strong star formation bursts (e.g. *episodic star formation history, induced star formation, and gas-rich mergers.*)  

**Kinematics.** Particularly, for models relying on recent tidal disruption, kinematic disequilibrium features should be visible. These would appear as velocity gradients, increasing velocity dispersions, outward-biased moving stars, or non-phase mixed structures [e.g, @kroupa1997; @read+2006; @sanchez-salcedo+hernandez2007]. 

**Deep photometry** may find or rule out signs of dynamical disequilibrium and tidal tails for tidally susceptible models *(e.g., MOND and tidal dwarfs.)*

Ongoing, upcoming, and future facilities will be essential for testing these theories. For example, given the typical faint magnitudes of dSph stars, chemistry is best accessible through large field-of-view multi-object spectroscopic instruments on large telescopes (e.g., 4MOST and extremely large telescopes @skuladottir+2023).  3D internal kinematics of dwarfs may require a successor to *Gaia*. However, using JWST and HST enables precise proper motions for small regions within dwarf galaxies [e.g., @vitral+2025], which may be sufficient to constrain vastly different internal dynamic structures and ongoing tidal disruption. Finaly, Photometric surveys by Rubin Observatory and Euclid will most-emminently probe yet fainter magnitudes around dwarf galaxies and possibly find or constrain stellar halos and their star formation histories. Altogether, new surveys will likely uncover novel aspects about the inner workings and outer halos of dwarf galaxies. 

In addition to new observing facilities, the next generation of dwarf simulations are beginning to answer questions and unravel processes in the formation of dwarf galaxies. With improved resolution, realism, and physics, the frequency and effects of various mechanisms discussed can be better constrained. 

# Conclusion and outlook

In this thesis, we have investigated the extended, outer density excess of Sculptor and Ursa Minor and its possible tidal origin. We first verified that Scl and UMi have unusually extended density profiles, compared to other dwarf spheroidals. We show that the density profiles are  robust to alternate data criteria, implying that this "density excess" is likely a real feature of each galaxy. 

We then investigated if tides were a permissible explanation. By modelling each galaxy based on cosmological initial conditions, we showed that tides do not strongly affect either galaxy. The LMC changes the orbital history of Scl and UMi, and tides become even weaker in a combined LMC and MW potential. While UMi may form a stellar stream, the stream is far fainter than is presently detectible. We conclude that recent tides are unlikely to shape the observed stellar distributions of Scl and UMi. 

Finally, we consider alternative scenarios forming extended density distribution. We review mechanisms ranging from episodic star formation histories, to accretion, to departures from \LCDM{}. While a more precise explanation awaits, upcoming and ongoing surveys will uncover the stellar populations within dwarf galaxies in unprecedented detail. Future work will  the Milky Way, uncovering the cosmic origins of the smallest structures forming building blocks of galaxies like ours.
